RECOMMENDATION 1
The etiology of thyrotoxicosis should be determined. If the diagnosis is not apparent based on the clinical presentation and initial biochemical evaluation, diagnostic testing is indicated and can include, depending on available exper- tise and resources, (1) measurement of TRAb, (2) deter- mination of the radioactive iodine uptake (RAIU), or (3) measurement of thyroidal blood flow on ultrasonography. A 123I or 99mTc pertechnetate scan should be obtained when the clinical presentation suggests a TA or TMNG.
Strong recommendation, moderate-quality evidence.
In a patient with a symmetrically enlarged thyroid, recent onset of orbitopathy, and moderate to severe hyperthyroid- ism, the diagnosis of GD is likely and further evaluation of hyperthyroidism causation is unnecessary. In a thyrotoxic patient with a nonnodular thyroid and no definite orbitopathy, measurement of TRAb or RAIU can be used to distinguish GD from other etiologies. In a study using a model of a theoretical population of 100,000 enrollees in a managed care organization in the United States, the use of TRAb mea- surements to diagnose GD compared to RAIU measurements reduced costs by 47% and resulted in a 46% quicker diag- nosis (45).
RAIU measures the percentage of administered RAI that is concentrated into thyroid tissue after a fixed interval, usually 24 hours. Technetium uptake measurements utilize pertech- netate that is trapped by the thyroid, but not organified. A technetium (TcO4) uptake measures the percentage of ad- ministered technetium that is trapped by the thyroid after a fixed interval, usually 20 minutes.
Uptake measurements are indicated when the diagnosis is in question (except during pregnancy and usually during lactation (see Section [T4]) and distinguishes causes of thy- rotoxicosis having elevated or normal uptake over the thyroid gland from those with near-absent uptake (Table 3). Uptake is usually elevated in patients with GD and normal or high in toxic nodular goiter, unless there has been a recent exposure to iodine (e.g., radiocontrast). The RAIU will be near zero in patients with painless, postpartum, or subacute thyroiditis; factitious ingestion of thyroid hormone; or recent excess io- dine intake. The RAIU may be low after exposure to iodin- ated contrast in the preceding 1–2 months or with ingestion of a diet unusually rich in iodine such as seaweed soup or
Table 3. Causes of Thyrotoxicosis
Thyrotoxicosis associated with a normal or elevated RAI uptake over the necka
GD
TA or TMNG
Trophoblastic disease
TSH-producing pituitary adenomas
Resistance to thyroid hormone (T3 receptor b mutation,
THRB)b
Thyrotoxicosis associated with a near-absent RAI uptake over the neck
Painless (silent) thyroiditis
Amiodarone-induced thyroiditis
Subacute (granulomatous, de Quervain’s) thyroiditis Palpation thyroiditis
Iatrogenic thyrotoxicosis
Factitious ingestion of thyroid hormone
Struma ovarii
Acute thyroiditis
Extensive metastases from follicular thyroid cancer
aIn iodine-induced or iodine-exposed hyperthyroidism (including amiodarone type 1), the uptake may be low.
bPatients are not uniformly clinically hyperthyroid. T3, triiodo- thyronine.
kelp. However, RAIU is rarely <1% unless the iodine expo- sure is reoccurring, such as during treatment with amiodar- one. When exposure to excess iodine is suspected (e.g., when the RAIU is lower than expected from the clinical history), assessment of urinary iodine concentration (spot urine iodine adjusted for urine creatinine concentration or a 24-hour urine iodine concentration) may be helpful. The uptake over the neck will also be absent in a patient with struma ovarii, where the abnormal thyroid tissue is located in an ovarian teratoma.
Thyroid scans provide a planar image of the thyroid gland using a gamma camera to assess potential variability in the concentration of the radioisotope within thyroid tissue. RAI scans may be obtained coincident with the RAIU and tech- netium scans may be obtained coincident with the technetium uptake. While technetium scans result in a low range of normal uptake and high background activity, total body ra- diation exposure is less than for 123I scans; either type of scan can be useful in determining the etiology of hyperthyroidism in the presence of thyroid nodularity.
A thyroid scan should be obtained if the clinical presen- tation suggests a TA or TMNG. The pattern of RAIU in GD is diffuse unless coexistent nodules or fibrosis is present. The pattern of uptake in a patient with a single TA generally shows focal uptake in the adenoma with suppressed uptake in the surrounding and contralateral thyroid tissue. The image in TMNG demonstrates multiple areas of focal increased and suppressed uptake. If autonomy is extensive, the image may be difficult to distinguish from that of GD (46). Additionally, GD and nontoxic nodular goiter may coincide, resulting in positive TRAb levels and a nodular ultrasound or heteroge- neous uptake images (47).
Where expertise is available, ultrasonography with color flow Doppler can distinguish thyroid hyperactivity (increased flow) from destructive thyroiditis (48). Quantitative Doppler evaluation requires careful adjustments to prevent artifacts and measures the peak systolic velocity from intrathyroidal arteries or the inferior thyroidal artery (49). This test may
be particularly useful when radioactive iodine (RAI) is con- traindicated, such as during pregnancy or breastfeeding. Doppler flow has also been used to distinguish between subtypes of amiodarone-induced thyrotoxicosis (see Section [V2]) and between GD and destructive thyroiditis (see Sec- tion [W2]).
The ratio of total T3 to total T4 can also be useful in as- sessing the etiology of thyrotoxicosis when scintigraphy is contraindicated. Because a hyperactive gland produces more T3 than T4, T3 will be elevated above the upper limit of normal more than T4 in thyrotoxicosis caused by hyperthy- roidism, whereas T4 is elevated more than T3 in thyrotoxi- cosis caused by thyroiditis (50); in one study the ratio of total T3 to total T4 (ng/lg) was >20 in GD and toxic nodular goiter, and <20 in painless or postpartum thyroiditis (51). A high T4 to T3 ratio may be seen in thyrotoxicosis factitia (from exogenous levothyroxine).
The choice of initial diagnostic testing depends on cost, availability, and local expertise. TRAb is cost effective be- cause if it is positive it confirms the diagnosis of the most common cause of thyrotoxicosis. If negative it does not dis- tinguish among other etiologies, however, and it can be negative in very mild GD. If third-generation TRAb assays are not readily available, RAIU is preferred for initial testing.
Diagnostic testing may be influenced by the choice of therapy (see Section [C]). For example, measuring TRAb in a patient with GD who plans on taking methimazole (MMI) with the hope of achieving a remission will provide a baseline measurement for disease activity. Obtaining a RAIU in a patient who prefers RAI treatment will provide both diag- nostic information and facilitate the calculation of the RAI dose (see Section [D2]).
In most patients, distinction between subacute and painless thyroiditis is not difficult. Subacute thyroiditis is generally painful, the gland is firm to hard on palpation, and the erythrocyte sedimentation rate is usually >50mm/h and sometimes over 100 mm/h. Patients with painless thyroiditis presenting within the first year after childbirth (postpartum thyroiditis) often have a personal or family history of auto- immune thyroid disease and typically have measurable serum concentrations of anti–thyroid peroxidase antibodies (52).
Thyroglobulin is released along with thyroid hormone in subacute, painless, and palpation thyroiditis (following manipulation of the thyroid gland during surgery), whereas its release is suppressed in the setting of exogenous thyroid hormone administration. If not elucidated by the history, factitious ingestion of thyroid hormone can be distinguished from other causes of thyrotoxicosis by a low serum thyro- globulin level, a near-zero RAIU, and a T3 to T4 ratio (ng/lg) <20 if due to exogenous levothyroxine (53). In patients with antithyroglobulin antibodies, which interfere with thyro- globulin measurement, an alternative but not widely avail- able approach is measurement of fecal T4 (54); mean values were 1.03nmol/g in euthyroid patients, 1.93nmol/g in Graves’ hyperthyroidism, and 12–24 nmol/g in factitious thyrotoxicosis.
Technical remarks: There are two methods for measuring Thyroid Receptor Antibodies (TRAb) (55). Third generation TSH Binding Inhibition Immunoglobulin (TBII) assays are competition assays which measure inhibition of binding of either a labeled monoclonal anti-human TSH-R antibody or labeled TSH to a recombinant TSH-R. These TRAb or TBII
assays are unable to distinguish the TSH-R antibody types. Bioassays for the Thyroid Stimulating Immunoglobulin (TSI) measure the ability of TSI to increase the intracellular level of cAMP directly or indirectly, e.g. from engineered Chinese Hamster Ovary (CHO) cells transfected with hTSH-R reported through increased luciferase production. Such assays specifically detect simulating antibodies (TSI) and can differentiate between the TSH-R antibody types. In the setting of overt thyrotoxicosis, newer TRAb binding and bioassays have a sensitivity of 96–97% and a specificity of 99% for GD (56,57).
[B4] Symptomatic management
